mz700em - an MZ700 emulator for VGA PCs running Linux

Z80 emulation from `xz80', copyright (C) 1994 Ian Collier.
MZ700 support and VGA front-end (C) 1996 Russell Marks.


This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.


`mz700fon.dat' is the character font data; this is not from the MZ700,
but put together by hand (by me) - it's public domain. It was
generated from `font.txt' using `unpix'.


Roadmap
-------

The COPYING file contains a copy of the GPL described above.

ChangeLog describes differences between all versions.


Description
-----------

`mz700em' is a Sharp MZ700 emulator. It uses svgalib. It supports most
m/c programs and games, including (say) Snake & Snake and S1-BASIC,
but can currently only load m/c files from the ROM monitor. No other
form of loading is possible, and saving is not possible. Among other
things, this means that while you *can* load Basic, you *can't* load
Basic programs.

Note that I wrote mz700em solely to be able to play a few old MZ700
games (esp. Snake & Snake) - and you should bear this in mind before
flaming me for its many omissions... :-)


Installation
------------

First, get a copy of the ROM from an MZ700 (see below).

You'll also need my rawkey library - a precompiled ELF copy is
included here.

After sorting the ROM out etc., do `make' and `make install'.

Be sure to read all of this README. mz700em is a quick hack, so you'd
better know all about the gotchas before running it. :-)


Getting a copy of the ROM
-------------------------

Since the ROM is still copyright Sharp and they don't (AFAIK) allow
free use in emulators, I'm not allowed to include a copy here. So, you
need to transfer it from a real MZ700 yourself. This shouldn't be too
hard, as the `mzget' program included here can load programs etc. from
tape if you have a soundcard on /dev/dsp capable of 44.1kHz recording.
Do `make mzget' to compile it.

To transfer the ROM then, you need to do this on an MZ700 from the ROM
monitor:

	S00000FFF0000

Yes, no spaces! This saves 0000h-0FFFh, the 4k ROM. (The last 0000h is
an execution address, which doesn't matter, but *is* required for the
command to work.) Record this to tape as you normally would. Then, run
mzget and play that tape into the soundcard's mic socket or whatever.
This should probably work first time - if it doesn't, try changing the
volume levels or, as a last resort, modify line 231 of mzget.c and
recompile. But if it does work, you'll end up with `header.dat', which
you don't need in this case, and `out.dat' which will contain the ROM.
Do `mv out.dat mz700.rom', then do `md5sum mz700.rom'. You should get:

	27990ced7cb97dd80356f517aa705010  mz700.rom

...as that's what my copy gives. If you do get this, then your ROM is
definitely ok, and the emulator should then work. Even if you don't
get this result, it's possible you may simply have a different ROM
version, so you should try it and see if it works anyway.

BTW, don't worry if `mzget' seems to stop in the middle of the tape
data, i.e. if it claims to have loaded ok before the noise has
stopped. The MZ700 perversely saves tape data *twice* - that's right,
two copies. The ROM tape load routine tries loading the second copy if
the first copy didn't work, and only gives an error if neither copy
worked. `mzget' only ever bothers with the first copy.

I know requiring you to transfer the ROM yourself is a bit of a pain,
but I don't really have a choice. Sorry. Still, if you've tried this
and failed, or don't have a good enough soundcard, send me a dos
format 1.4Mb floppy *WITH RETURN POSTAGE!* and either:

- a photocopy of the first page of the ROM disassembly in the manual
(p165 in my copy); or

- a copy of the first 128 bytes of the ROM (which you'll have to
transcribe). You can get an MZ700 to display these with `D0000' from
the ROM monitor - copy down the first 16 lines of hex.

...and I'll send you a copy of the ROM. (The idea of your sending one
of the above is to demonstrate that you have an MZ700 and thus a legal
copy of the ROM, of course.)

Please please make sure to send self-addressed return postage, and
make sure it's suitable for *me* to send. Something with (say) US
stamps on won't impress the UK post office. :-)


History etc.
------------

Mz700em is based on Ian Collier's xz80, via Z81 and nc100em.

I give Ian the main author credit for it, as the Z80 emulation is much
harder to do than emulating the MZ700's hardware etc. However, any
correspondence regarding mz700em should be to me, as Ian hasn't had
anything else to do with it and probably hasn't even heard of the
MZ700.


Using mz700em
-------------

There's no man page due to this being a really quick hack, so this'll
have to do. Sorry. :-)

You can quit with F10. Virtual console switching works as usual with
Alt-Fn. The emulated MZ700 attempts to run at 3.5MHz, so if xz80 runs
at a reasonable speed on your machine, this should too.

The keyboard assumes a UK layout, I'm afraid, and some keys may be
inaccessible on some other layouts. Most keys are mapped in the
obvious way, but there are some exceptions:

Keyboard		Emulated as

'			:
#			down-arrow/pound sign
`			graph
page up			graph (as well - take your pick)
tab			alpha
page down		_ (key above CR on the MZ)
<--			break
F7			@
F8			?

Some of these mappings suck pretty hard, but there's not much I can do
about that, the MZ700 keyboard is *weird*.

Running it with "mz700em -s" enables sound. This is very experimental,
and quite frankly, not very good. See below for problems with it.


There are the following bugs/restrictions/etc. in mz700em:

Files to be loaded must be in "MZF" format. This was artificially
kludged up in the same way as I did with the xzx savefile format - a
magic number followed by the tape file's header and data. You can use
the `mzget' program described earlier to load from tape if you have a
soundcard on /dev/dsp capable of 44.1kHz recording. (Mzget outputs
header.dat and out.dat. To make a mzf file from these do:

	(echo -n 'MZF1';cat header.dat out.dat) >foo.mzf

...then to load this in mz700em type "LFOO" (or "L FOO") in the ROM
monitor.)

Any mzf files to be loaded as described above must be in the current
directory.

There's no support for printer, disk, or even tape (apart from the
modified monitor command mentioned above).

The sound support isn't very good - music will play infinitely fast,
and sound effects may sound odd. It also seems to lock up at times
(the latter problem may be fixed now, I'm not sure), and at other
times it breaks up. And it sounds really, *really* bad on kernel
v2.0.x. I don't think the DMA buffer is being zeroed between transfers
any more, so if/when it breaks up (as it seems to, in mz700em) it
sounds disgustingly bad.

Only the first 2k of the character font data is `implemented'. (Some
(later?) machines had another 2k's worth with space invader and pacman
graphics, etc.) So some non-sharp games may look odd. I know kuma's
"beginner's chess" would, for example.

The 12-hourly interrupt is not emulated. As a result, times will not
switch from am -> pm or vice versa - so in Basic, a TI$ of "115959"
will incr to "000000", and "235959" will incr to "120000".

The colours are a bit funny. They're too bright, but darker colours
don't seem to really look right either. (sigh)


Games I can send copies of
--------------------------

If you have trouble transferring games from tape, there are several
games I've transferred which I could send. I'll need proof that you've
got the game - a photocopy of the inlay (or even the tape itself) is
sufficient. (As I said above, please include a dos format disk and
suitable return postage.)

Anyway, the games I've got are:

- all the ones from sharp's game tapes 1&2 - snake & snake, circus
star, super puckman, round shoot, manhunt, land escape, painful man,
send-1, battle game, and moving searcher.

- kuma's "star avenger" and "void".


(Lack of) Future developments
-----------------------------

While I'm very unlikely to do further hacking on mz700em in future,
feel free to try and prod me into making it better, if you want. :-)


Contacting me
-------------

No email address at the moment I'm afraid. :-(

Postal address:
		Russell Marks,
		3 Rapley Close,
		Camberley,
		Surrey,
		GU15 4ER,
		United Kingdom.

If you insist on abbreviating my name, please use "R. J. Marks".


Share and enjoy! 

-Rus.
